---
title: Outsourced Blog Comments
tags: blog, code
date: 2008/11/28
---
<blockquote class="update">
<p><em>Update 2011/08/16:</em> This post is about an older version of the blog. I used to use WordPress and redesigned the template a while back.
</p>
</blockquote>

I just finished redoing the template for this here blog thing, and the most
significant change is that there are no longer comments on it.

I reached this decision starting from a simple engineering observation: a good
piece of software does [few things](http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Antoine_de_Saint_Exup%C3%A9ry "Perfection is attained, not when no more can be added, but when no more can be removed.") and does them well. It shouldn't re-
invent things, and it certainly shouldn't re-invent things *poorly*. Looking
at it like that, it's obvious that the core feature of the blog is my text
(whether that feature *sucks* or not I'll leave up to you). The comment engine
is peripheral, and, frankly, not very well done. There's no threading, up
/down-voting, user information, good formatting, etc. It's pretty lame.

So I figured it would be better to re-use an existing comment system.
[Reddit](http://www.reddit.com/) is [open source](http://code.reddit.com/) so I could, in theory, use that. But
thinking about it a bit more, the obvious problem is that the best feature of
reddit (and [digg](http://digg.com/)'s, [dzone](http://www.dzone.com)'s, etc.) comment systems isn't the
*code*, it's the *people*. So the solution is simple: take comments off my
blog and just direct people to comment on one of those sites. Odds are good
that they're already a member of one or more of them anyway so there's isn't a
lot of hassle there.

## Downsides

One of the obvious downsides is that conversation about what I write is no
longer on my territory. I lose the ability to moderate them or decide how long
they're online. If reddit kills the thread for one of my posts there's nothing
I can do about it. If some guy on digg thinks I'm an ass, I'm powerless to
silence him.

If I cared about traffic or "stickiness" or something it might also bother me
that people will no longer come to *my* site to see further comments. They'll
go to reddit, or digg, or wherever.

But I don't care about any of those. Honestly, traffic to my server is a net
negative. Bandwidth costs me money. What motivates me is writing, and having
people read it and discuss it. Deleting spam comments is not how I get my
rocks off.

## Upside

From that perspective, offloading comments makes a lot of sense. My little
[Wordpress](http://wordpress.org/) blog can't hope to provide a comment UI anywhere near as good
as most news aggregators out there. Every time I saw someone posting a comment
with code on my blog followed by another comment apologizing for the way
WordPress ate its formatting, I cringed. Now I don't have that problem: reddit
has [markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/).

Likewise, I don't have to moderate comments anymore. News aggregators are
centered almost precisely on that problem and they do it far better than I
can.

More importantly, they provide a better community for discussing my writing
than I can. It's a bit odd, but more people will comment about a blog post of
mine on another site than they will on the post itself. The logic is obvious.
You don't get reddit karma for commenting on my blog *on my blog* but you do
if you comment on it on reddit. Since commenting on another site is clearly
better, I may as well make it the *only* choice.

## The Real Downside

There is one very real bad part about the change, though. If you've been kind
enough to comment on my blog before, your comment is no longer online. This
isn't because your comments weren't good. The quality of comments I received
was always stellar, even when you fought with the limitations of the system.
I'm sorry your words are no longer up here.
