---
title: "How My Book Launch Went"
tags: book game-dev design game-patterns
---

Greetings, superfans! When we [last tuned in][blog post], I was just about to
"launch" [my self-published book][book]. I put that in quotes because it's an
awfully serious-sounding word for what was really just doing some clicking on my
laptop. If my last post was the climax of my book writing adventure, consider
this the denouement. You've been with me this long, it's the least I can do.

[blog post]: /2014/11/03/bringing-my-web-book-to-print-and-ebook/
[book]: http://gameprogrammingpatterns.com/

I do hold back one detail, though: while I talk about sales here, I won't be
putting cash numbers on it. If you try hard enough, you can calculate them
yourself, but I feel weird sharing financial details. Strangely, it's not
because I'm shy about *strangers* knowing it as much as I am friends and family.
So much room for awkwardness there.

## I am a marketer and I do marketer-y things

As I mentioned before, I decided to self-publish about halfway through writing
the manuscript. That meant I had to wear all of the hats that a publisher has
dedicated noggins for: editor, designer, proofreader, and... marketer. This last
one is the least fun for me, but I know it's important.

I read a bit online and what a lot of people said was that email lists are gold.
*I* like that they are pull-based instead of push-based. Instead of jamming
myself and my book down strangers' throats, they sign up of their own volition.
I only get in touch with the people who actually want to hear from me.

So I created a [MailChimp][] account -- chosen over other mailing list providers
mainly because of their cute logo -- and slapped a little "sign up!" form on
every page of the site. Whenever I put a new chapter online, I got a traffic
bump and some fraction of those people were kind or foolhardy enough to grant me
their email address.

[mailchimp]: http://mailchimp.com/

I did this pretty early in the writing process so that I could give it time to
grow before the book was complete. By putting the whole book online and
releasing it chapterly (like a Dickens serial for the Internet age) I had
amassed a surprisingly large list by the time I was ready to <strike>try to
squeeze money out of them</strike> tell them my book was complete. Around 8,000
people, which still seems like a crazy large number to me.

I also, despite [the content of my tweets][tweets], managed to acquire a fair
number of twitter friends. (I don't like thinking of them "followers".
Celebutants and TEDx thought/cult leaders have "followers". I just have Internet
pals.)

[tweets]: https://twitter.com/munificentbob

## A new front page

Now that the book is a *product* as much as it is a *web site*, I redid the
front page to highlight both of those. It still, of course, links to the web
version. And, *of course*, the entire contents of the book are still readable on
the web. But I also added links to the various sites where you could get the
print version, Kindle, and EPUB.

I wanted to emphasize the "bookyness" of it, the physicality, so I got out my
camera and my macro lens and took a bunch of honest-to-God photos of it:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/cover-shoot.jpg">
  <figcaption>Wait... if the camera is in the photo, how did I take
  <em>this</em> shot?</figcaption>
</figure>

There's something weird and meta about taking a picture of myself taking photos
of a book whose cover I designed using a photo I took of an illustration I drew.
I should take a picture of myself writing this blog post just to go full
Inception.

Next, I spent way too long coming up with a design and text for the front page.
Seriously, it took me as long to make what is effectively a glorified list of
hyperlinks as it did to write, illustrate, and edit a full chapter of the book.
I think it's worth it, though. The front page is the reader's first impression
of the book. If I make you feel that page is beautiful and high quality, it's a
short hop to having faith that the inside of the book is too.

I ended up with this:

<figure>
  <a href="http://gameprogrammingpatterns.com" target="_blank"><img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/new-site.jpg"></a>
  <figcaption>Click to zoom!</figcaption>
</figure>

## This part of the blog post is about writing a blog post

I feel a little squirmy writing this. Like I said, I'm uncomfortable with
self-promotion. I hoped, wanted, to get a decent amount of... attention?
traffic? validation of my worth as a human? when I announced the for-sale
versions of the book. Readers had been asking for them for a while, so I knew
there would be some excitement just by saying, "Here they are."

But that didn't feel really newsworthy to me. There wasn't much to discuss, just
"here they are. moneys plz." People like a story, and I like telling them,
especially when the protagonist is yours truly. I've been really lucky to have a
lot of encouragement on this project from readers, and I thought one way to say
thanks would be to give a window into what the production process was like. It's
a side of book-making that I don't see very much online.

Also, it let me blather about fonts for six thousand words. Seriously, the [blog
post][] I wrote about turning the manuscript into a physical book is longer than
almost every chapter in the book. Clearly, I need an editor.

This also took a lot of time -- about a week -- but I really enjoyed writing it
all down. I did my best to make it an entertaining read. While I hoped it would
drive traffic to the book, I did honestly want it to be a worthwhile read in and
of itself. I believe that, when played well, life is a non-zero-sum game.

## I <3 filling out web forms

I was ready to upload the new site, and the new blog post. All that was left was
to actually make the book available. This involved uploading various files --
inside PDF for the print version, cover, EPUB file, MOBI file -- to various
sites whose forms cover the full gamut of usability. Clicking the final "OK" on
CreateSpace, Kindle Direct Publishing, and Smashwords was both nerve-wracking
and anti-climactic.

Then the waiting game. Most of these sites do various amounts of automated and
manual validation that take time to process. I noticed a typo that forced me to
re-upload to CreateSpace. Kindle found a couple of spelling errors (surprising
given how many rounds of editing I'd done by now). Smashwords asked me to have
an explicit cover page.

Once those were all happy, the listings appeared. If you knew to look for them,
you could have bought the book.

CreateSpace and Smashwords also distribute to other sales channels (things like
Lightning Source and book stores for the former; iBooks, Nook, Kobo, etc. for
the latter). I wanted to wait for those sales channels to populate before I
pulled the switch but... well, I got impatient.

As soon as I saw [the Amazon page for my book][amazon], I just couldn't wait any
more. I pushed the new version of the site and the blog post. I wrote an email
and blasted the mailing list. I tweeted. I mentioned it on G+.

[amazon]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0990582906

What I *didn't* do this time was post it to Reddit. It felt a little too
self-serving for how Reddit rolls. I did post a link to the blog [on Hacker
News][hn] since that crowd is more accepting of self-promotion.

[hn]: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=8555285

I had tabs open for the Smashwords sales dashboard, CreateSpace royalties,
Kindle Direct Publishing sales report, Twitter, and Hacker News. I refreshed
those suckers like my life depended on it.

## Command, we are ready for launch

This moment, as dumb as it sounds, was actually pretty stressful. A surprisingly
large number of self-published books just sink to the depths leaving nary a
ripple on the surface. You hear horror stories of writers whose novels sell
*zero* copies. Nonfiction is a lot easier, but I still had no idea if people
really liked the book enough to drop real cash on it.

*Refresh refresh refresh refresh.* A nervous sweat trickled down my neck.

A few minutes later, Smashwords reported two sales. Holy shit! Someone bought
the book! I was a professional writer!

Then people started retweeting me. Someone posted a blurb about it [on the gamedev subreddit][gamedev] and someone else did [on the programming subreddit][proggit].

[gamedev]: http://www.reddit.com/r/gamedev/comments/2l9hr0/game_programming_patterns_is_now_in_print/
[proggit]: http://www.reddit.com/r/programming/comments/2l8v11/today_is_the_day_game_programming_patterns_now_in/

People started saying super nice things! About me! It was awesome! Also, I was
drinking in celebration at the same time so that multiplied all the good
feelings.

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/cat.gif">
  <figcaption>How I felt.</figcaption>
</figure>

I feverishly replied to as many comments, tweets, and emails as I could. (All
the while still refreshing the other tabs.) Eventually, I maxed out my serotonin
levels and had to crash. Like some candy raver in an E puddle in the back of the
chill-out room, I passed out, totally spent.

## The next day

I woke up the next morning feeling like a kid on Christmas. A kid who wasn't
*entirely* certain he'd been good enough for Santa to bring him presents.
Morning coffee in hand, I opened up my laptop and checked all the dashboards.

While I slept, I'd sold enough copies to pay off all of the expenses of the
book. That isn't actually *that* much: all I'd paid for was ISBN numbers, a
couple of fonts, freelance copy-editing, and a business license. But, still, I
was in the black now.

I replied to as many people as I could and then headed into the office to
<strike>get some work done</strike> spend the rest of the day refreshing my
browser. Aggregate sales stats started showing up in the various dashboards:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/kindle-hockey.png">
  <figcaption>Kindle sales on the first day.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/smash-hockey.png">
  <figcaption>Smashwords (EPUB) sales on the first day.</figcaption>
</figure>

CreateSpace doesn't draw a pretty picture for you, but the raw numbers were
doing the same thing. I told my coworkers and they got all excited for me.

The rest of the day was basically a blur of responding to people and telling my
wife and team how high the numbers were going. At some point, when I refreshed
the Amazon page, I noticed a little banner had appeared next to my book:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/banner.png">
  <figcaption>No way.</figcaption>
</figure>

It turns out Amazon tracks book sales *very quickly.* For the brief period of
time where I had saturated social media, enough sales were coming in to actually
make it the best-selling game programming book for a little while.

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/best-game.png">
  <figcaption>Sorry "Learning Python".</figcaption>
</figure>

Wait, did I say "game programming"? I meant #1 out of *all programming books*:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/best-programming.png">
  <figcaption>I did a victory lap at this point.</figcaption>
</figure>

At it's peak, my book was the #7 best-selling book in the entire computer
category:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/best-computer.png">
  <figcaption>Up there with Minecraft!</figcaption>
</figure>

Around this time, I started referring to myself in the third person as
"best-selling author Robert Nystrom". Of course, most of the other books in
those lists had been there for weeks or months, but I had my moment in the sun
and I was committed to making the most of it.

## Return to normalcy

The peak, naturally, only lasted about a day. I was most curious to see what the
right side of the graph would look like. Would it fall to zero? A slow trickle?
A steady passive income?

When I sent out the email for the book, one thing I asked was for people to
write honest, detailed reviews. I figured a book page with a good set of reviews
would give it the air of legimitacy for future customers who stumbled onto the
book on their own. That in turn would help the book have a longer sales tail.

Because people are awesome and I love every one of them, people did indeed do
this. It took a while, but reviews started trickling in.

Other pleasant surprises started happening too. The book finally made its way
through the other channels. I put it up on [Google Play][], and Smashwords got
it onto [iBooks][], [Nook][], and some other places. I finally figured out a
place to [sell the PDF][]. (If you go to [the book's site][book] now, these are
all listed there.)

[ibooks]: http://itunes.apple.com/us/book/isbn9780990582915
[google play]: https://play.google.com/store/books/details/Robert_Nystrom_Game_Programming_Patterns?id=9fIwBQAAQBAJ
[nook]: http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/game-programming-patterns-robert-nystrom/1102794265?ean=2940046391428
[sell the pdf]: https://payhip.com/b/iZRI

In a mistake that I don't understand but can't bear to correct, Apple even
decided to spice up my name a bit:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/umlaut.png">
  <figcaption>Robert Nyström, now 15% more metal.</figcaption>
</figure>

Then, a few days later, the most magical part of this whole thing started
happening (though, honestly, the umlaut is a close second). That's about how
long it took for print copies to get shipped to people.

Soon, friends and family -- some who I haven't seen in years -- started sending
me pictures of their copies of the book. Kind strangers in countries I couldn't
find on a map tweeted pictures of themselves opening the shipping box with
excitement to see my dumb face staring out at them.

It's hard to articulate how profoundly gratifying that is. Through almost the
entire six years I've been working on this book, it's been a purely digital
thing. While I spend an astonishing amount of my life on the Internet, it still
never quite feels "real" to me.

Is rearranging some polarization on an SSD really *making* something? Is a few
words glowing on an LCD actually communicating with a *person*, or just some
pixelated avatar?

But seeing photos of real live people holding an actual *physical thing* filled
with words and illustrations I put together, and seeing them *happy* to have it
in their hands finally made it click for me that I made something real that
actually affected people.

## How we're looking now

Things have mostly settled down since then, though I do still have lots of email
to catch up on (sorry!). Now that the book is in pretty much every sales
channel, e-book walled garden, and international site for Amazon, I'm *finally*
getting to the point where I can think of the book as *done* and put it into the
background of my life.

So far, buyers have been trickling in at a decent rate. Here's what my Kindle
sales look like as of writing this post:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2014/11/kindle-now.png">
  <figcaption>EPUB is similar, and I think print is too.</figcaption>
</figure>

The book has been out about two weeks, and I've sold:

*   **796 print copies.** 555 in the US, 145 in Great Britain, 95 in Europe, and
    1 directly from createspace.com.

*   **274 Kindle copies.** I'll spare you the per country break-down, but it is
    really cool to see that I've sold it in India, Japan, Brazil, and other
    places.

*   **70 copies from smashwords.** This is people who wany to buy the EPUB file
    directly.

*   **7 copies from iBooks.** The book only appeared a few days ago, so I expect
    this to catch up with the other channels over time.

That's a grand total of **1,147 copies sold in the first two weeks.** I won't be
retiring off of this, but I'm really really happy with that number, and
unbelievably grateful to everyone who bought a copy.

While I'm planning to take a good long break from serious projects first, this
level of success has certainly gotten me pumped about writing another book. If I
do, I'm 100% confident now in my approach of putting the entire book online for
free. I'm certain I wouldn't have sold anywhere near this many copies if the
book's website hadn't built an audience who were ready and eager to get their
hands on a copy.

It turns out giving something away is a great way to get something back.
