---
title: "640 Pages in 15 Months"
tags: book design language personal
---

My book [*Crafting Interpreters*][ci] on programming languages is done. OK, OK.
I know [I said it was done like fifteen months ago][done]. But now it's *really*
done. And by that I mean, the print, e-book and PDF versions are done. **You can
[buy it][ci].** You can hold it in your hands. And I do mean "hands" plural.
Because this little "handbook" turned out way larger than I anticipated:

[ci]: http://craftinginterpreters.com/
[done]: /2020/04/05/crafting-crafting-interpreters/

<figure>
  <a href="http://craftinginterpreters.com/"><img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/book.jpg"></a>
  <figcaption>This is a proof copy, so it looks a little different than the final design.</figcaption>
</figure>

Look at that thing. 640 pages, eight inches wide, ten inches tall. If you get
tired of reading it, it can serve as a doorstop or protect you from small-arms
fire.

Remember back on Mr. Roger's Neighborhood when he would take you to a factory
and show you how pencils or umbrellas are made? I love that stuff, so I thought
maybe you might like to see what I spent the past year on. You can read this as
a peek behind the curtain, or maybe a long apology for why it took so long.

## Where I left off

What I said in my last post was that *Crafting Interpreters* was *finished*, and
by that I meant that I'd written all the code, dotted the last sentence, and
scanned the last illustration. The *content* of the book was complete. But it
wasn't a book yet. Just a pile of Markdown and PNG files that my embarrassingly
bad Python code would begrudgingly turn into a website.

My goal has always been to make a real book, with pages and everything.
Completing the content was just one (granted, the most important) step in that
journey. Once I finished the last chapter and put it online, I took about a
month-long break. I had been writing [every single day for almost four
years][log] and I was *fried*. Also, in case you don't remember, early 2020 was
not exactly a Totally Fine Time in World History.

[log]: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/blob/master/note/log.txt

## A new build system

After a few weeks, my desire to have this project completely done returned and I
eased my way back into working on it. I fixed a whole pile of typos and other
mistakes that readers [filed bugs for][bugs] (thanks!).

[bugs]: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/issues

Then, for no real good reason at all, I decided to rewrite the whole build
system for the book in [Dart][]. The build script I wrote for [my first book][gpp]
was dead simple. [Literally a single Python script][gpp py] that took a Markdown
file for each book chapter and rendered it to HTML while weaving in the code
snippets. The world's dumbest static site generator.

[dart]: https://dart.dev/
[gpp]: http://gameprogrammingpatterns.com/
[gpp py]: https://github.com/munificent/game-programming-patterns/blob/master/script/format.py

I started with that for *Crafting Interpreters* but then it grew and grew. My
second book includes every single line of code for two complete interpreters,
which it builds up incrementally across thirty chapters. I needed to not just
build the HTML for the book's website, but also make sure the code really did
work. I gave the build system the ability to not only generate the site for the
book, but also to slice and dice the code. Given a chapter, or even a single
point within a chapter, it can output a program containing all of the code for
the interpreters up to that point. Then I can take that code, compile it, and
run it through my automated test suite to make sure the code I'm showing you
does what it's supposed to.

Useful, but really straining the limits of how much code I want to maintain in a
dynamically typed language like Python, at least, with my (low) level of Python
expertise. Also, it was, frankly, really slow. So over a period of a couple of
weeks, I rewrote the whole thing in Dart.

I work at Google on the [Dart language][dart] team as my day job, so picking
Dart was not an unbiased choice. But it's my build system for my book, and I
know Dart and many of its core libraries and packages like the back of my hand.
Hell, I personally wrote the initial version of the canonical [markdown
package][md].

[dart]: https://dart.dev/
[md]: https://pub.dev/packages/markdown

I found a pretty nice [package for mustache templates][stache], so I converted
the book's old Liquid templates to that. I didn't find a good syntax
highlighter. But it's not like I looked very hard either. It seemed like just
the kind of fun thing to implement from scratch, so I whipped one up loosely
based on Pygments.

[stache]: https://pub.dev/packages/mustache_template

The end result is a new build system that generates *exactly* the HTML and
syntax-highlighted code that I want. Also, it is literally ten *times* faster
than the old Python one. As you'll see, it turned out to be handy that I had
better control over the Markdown processing, but at the time I was basically
just doing this for fun and to procrastinate the real work.

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/speed.png">
  <figcaption>I planned to implement some clever incremental rebuild logic in
  the dev server, but it builds so fast that I just rebuild everything on every
  refresh.</figcaption>
</figure>

Once I had the new build system outputting nice clean HTML and I'd deleted the
old Python stuff, it was time to get started.

## Designing the book

Doing a large graphic design project like a book works a lot like web dev or
game programming where it sort of has two levels. First you set up your
"framework" or "engine". On the web, this is your web framework and all of your
CSS and HTML templates. In games, it's your game engine. Then you pour content
into that structure. With the right framework, adding content is easy.

For graphic design using a program like Adobe InDesign, the way it works is you
set up styles and masters. A master defines the margins and grid lines for a
page. It's the fences that corral all the text to keep those feral letters from
running around eating all the whitespace. Styles are like CSS: they let you take
a semantic kind of text or object and associate specific fonts, styles and
colors for it.

In theory, you get the masters and styles right and then typesetting is pretty
easy and mechanical. Now, I did *not* make my life easy when it comes to book
design. Book design is literally a two-dimensional spatial exercise and I made
my job harder both horizontally and vertically. If you've read any of it on the
web, you know my book has:

*   Prose, of course. So many words.

*   A lot of asides that need to be right next to certain pieces of text, code
    or illustrations that they refer to. Some of these can get pretty long.

*   Plenty of code. Also, each code snippet has a little location blurb next to
    it telling you where the code goes in the resulting program.

## How wide?

Horizontally, the main text column needs to be wide enough to fit the longest
line of code. I can use shorter lines and wrap the snippets more, but that makes
them harder to read. It also makes them vertically taller, which causes its own
problem.

Then I need room next to that for the asides, since they often remark directly
on specific sentences. I can make *those* narrower too, of course. But then they
wrap and get taller. Some asides are fairly long and if they get too tall, they
start colliding with each other or overlapping location snippets.

Oh, and since I ended up writing a 200k+ word book, it's going to have a high
page count. That means a thick book. Thick books need wider inner margins so the
text doesn't disappear into the spine.

All of this points towards a pretty wide page. Most CS textbooks -- at least the
ones on my bookshelf -- are 7.5 inches wide. I tried hard to come up with a
design that fit the code, asides, and healthy margins in that width while still
giving a text size that didn't require a magnifying glass. Eventually, I
conceded defeat.

Once I tried designing a set of metrics for an 8 inch wide page, everything fell
into place. I could have enough breathing room around the text to make it
enjoyable to read, a decent length for the code snippets, and plenty of room for
the asides. (Using a narrower font for the asides helped too).

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/metrics.png">
  <figcaption>Here are the final horizontal metrics.</figcaption>
</figure>

## How tall?

That left the other dimension. If I were going with a real publisher doing a
full offset print run, I could pick whatever page size I wanted. But since I'm
self publishing, that would mean paying up front for thousands of copies to be
printed and, I don't know, storing all the boxes in my garage or something.

Print on demand worked great for my last book, and I planned to do the same
thing for this one. That meant sticking to the limited set of page sizes that
KDP and IngramSpark support. The only reasonable one that is 8 inches wide is
8"Ã—10", so that's what I picked. The end result is a book that feels big, but
hopefully not awkwardly huge. I'm sorry. I promise to write a smaller book if I
ever write another.

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/master.png">
  <figcaption>The metrics for a complete chapter spread. Vertically, text is
  aligned to a classic 12pt baseline grid.</figcaption>
</figure>

The whole time I was picking these margins and metrics, I was also selecting
fonts and building styles. You can't do graphic design in a vacuum, so I picked
a test chapter and just typeset it and tweaked the fonts over and over again.
Eventually I got a set of fonts and styles I liked, some masters that seemed
workable, and I was ready to go. The framework was done and now it was time to
open the content hose.

## XML, like its 1999

Of course, problem #1 is that there *is* no content hose. I have to build one.
InDesign doesn't know what the hell Markdown or my weird ass build system is. I
sure as hell didn't want to, like, copy every chapter from my browser, paste it
into InDesign and then manually apply all the styles. I have a high pain
tolerance, but I'm not a masochist.

What InDesign *can* do is import XML. Even better, you can set it up to
automatically apply certain paragraph or character styles to certain tag names.
InDesign's XML support, alas, has not matured much since the time I described it
as [being implemented by a narcoleptic intern][gpp post]. For example, in HTML
you can italicize a word in a header by taking an italics tag and nesting it
inside a header tag. InDesign cannot comprehend such advanced data modeling. It
needs a flat series of unnested tags and if you need italics in your header, you
damn well better have a unique `<italics-header>` tag for it.

[gpp post]: /2014/11/03/bringing-my-web-book-to-print-and-ebook/

But now I had an ace up my sleeve. Since I had microscopic control over my build
system and its Markdown processing, I could write my own [custom XML
exporter][xml] that generated *exactly* the tags that would make InDesign not
cry and avoid as many InDesign XML import bugs as possible.

[xml]: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/blob/master/tool/bin/build_xml.dart

## JavaScript, in *my* InDesign?

Even so, XML import only gets you so far. Specifically, it gets you a "story" in
InDesign terms: a single continuous narrative of text that fills the main text
box and spans multiple pages:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/convert-before.png">
  <figcaption>What the initial XML import looks like. The pink text is where
  an illustration goes and the "@" tells me where to anchor the aside.</figcaption>
</figure>

The main story is where the prose and code snippets go, but the asides and the
location markers need to be pulled out float off to the side. With my last book,
I yanked those out manually. I literally cut each aside from the main text
column and pasted it into a new text box. It took forever, and that book was
less than half as long as this one with *way* fewer code snippets.

There are *1,133* code snippets in *Crafting Interpreters*. If I had to manually
cut and paste the location markers for each of those, I would lose my mind.
Worse, I would make a lot of mistakes, which would just create more work for
myself.

I'm an engineer so I am morally opposed to error-prone manual effort that can be
automated. Did you know that InDesign can be scripted using JavaScript? Well,
you do now, which apparently places you in a tiny minority because there are,
like, *no* docs for it out there. You can find a couple of auto-generated
references, a few sad cries for help from graphic designers clearly out of their
element with no responses, and that's it.

JavaScripting InDesign is a special kind of pain. There is no debugger. There
are no stack traces. There aren't even *debug prints*. There is literally just
`alert()`, and you can only call it *once*. And it halts your script.
Fortunately, I actually learned JavaScript back when that's all *browsers* gave
you, so I can hack it.

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/debug-js.png">
  <figcaption>Just like developing for IE6.</figcaption>
</figure>

I managed to cobble together a horrific script that would find all of the asides
and location markers, pull them out of the main text flow, and leave them off to
the side:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/convert-after.png">
  <figcaption>Asides and location markers are pulled out of the main flow and
  into their own text boxes.</figcaption>
</figure>

What I wasn't able to get the script to do was *position* the boxes correctly.
But InDesign has a thing called "anchors" where you can lock the position of an
element relative to another. A couple of carefully crafted Object Styles would
even set the horizontal metrics correctly and align the text to the right
baseline. All I had to do was anchor each text box and it worked perfectly!

Wait, did I say "perfectly"? I meant  it worked right about half the time and
the other half the time InDesign would inexplicably *turn off the fucking
borders of nearby code snippets*.

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/anchor.gif">
  <figcaption>What it looks like when InDesign hates you.</figcaption>
</figure>

I lost hours of my life to this stupid bug. Eventually, I realized that some
completely random subset of location tags would have to be manually positioned
because anchoring invariably broke some borders.

## Editing, again

All of the above took me a good month or so and then it was time to stop
fiddling around and get to work on the actual content. The first thing I did was
another editing pass of the entire book, front to back. I had already done three
drafts of each chapter as I was writing them, but I wanted to do one more now
that it was done so that I could get a better feel for continuity. It turns out
I repeated the same dumb jokes a lot. I fixed (most of) those.

This took five months. There's nothing fun to say about this, it was just a
chore.

## Copy editing

Next I hired an actual professional copy editor, [Kari Somerton][kari], to go
through and do the same thing. She was great. Most of the editing world uses
Microsoft Word and "Track Changes" to handle the editing process. Like most
software engineers, I live and breathe plaintext and Git. That way I can see
diffs of the changes, and go back through history.

[kari]: https://karisomerton.com/

I didn't want to abandon my workflow so I asked Kari to ramp up on Git and my
weird completely bespoke build system. She handled it with aplomb and churned
through the book in no time. She found hundreds and hundreds of mistakes. This
despite me doing four drafts and readers filing hundreds of issues already.
Professional copy editors are worth every penny.

## Typesetting the whole thing

Once the words were as good as they were gonna get, it was time to get them onto
pages. The process went like this:

1.  Create a new InDesign file for the next chapter.

2.  Export it to XML.

3.  Import the XML into InDesign.

4.  Run my little JavaScript script to pull out the asides and location markers.

5.  Go through and anchor the side bar stuff.

6.  Fix up whitespace at the end of pages.

The first five steps are a piece of cake. I'd wake up in the morning, brew a cup
of coffee, shamble upstairs to the iMac, and get started. I could grind through
those steps while half awake and get a chapter done in half an hour or so. It
was peaceful. Almost meditative.

And then step six. You see, that right there is the hard thing about typesetting
a book. And it's the really hard thing about typesetting *this* book. Because it
turns out there are a bunch of constraints on how content can be fit vertically
in a page. Obviously, we can't slice an illustration in half and put the top
half on one page and the bottom half on the next. The asides also really need to
fit on one page too, or it gets confusing to keep track of what they refer to.

Whenever possible, it's nice for the code snippets to not get split across pages
too. Some of those can be over a dozen lines long. (This is another reason why
wider horizontal metrics helped. Because if I had made the code snippets
narrower, they would end up taller, which would make them harder to fit on the
page.) And you don't want a header alone at the end of a page with no content
after it. And it's good to avoid [widows and orphans][]...

[widows and orphans]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Widows_and_orphans

Take all of those rules and restrictions, and mix in the completely fixed height
of a page and you got yourself a real constraint solving problem. Or, in my
case, 640 of them, all interwoven with each other. Because, you see, InDesign is
happy to solve all of this for you by just pushing content to later pages. Code
snippet too long? Move it to the next page. No room for prose under the header?
Move it all to the next page. What that gives you is a ton of dead white space
at the bottom of pages. It looks terrible and wastes space, like this:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/typeset.png">
  <figcaption>I thoughtfully left room on the page for your own doodles.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Speaking of illustrations...

At one level, the illustrations were easy. I specifically chose black and white
pen and ink because it's print friendly. When I first scanned the images as I
wrote each chapter, I brought them in at glorious 1200 DPI. Here's a crop:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/scan.png">
</figure>

A little level adjustment in Photoshop produces:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/illustration.png">
</figure>

So detailed! Exporting these to high resolution bitmaps that print well was a
snap, and they look great. (Well, as great as my handwriting looks, I guess.)

Incorporating the illustrations into the page layout was another story. Halfway
through typesetting, a lightbulb went off and I finally realized why most books
say, "Refer to Figure 123 to see blah blah blah..." That gives the typesetter
freedom to put Figure 123 wherever the hell it fits on any nearby page.

In my dumb book, because I am an idiot, the prose just refers directly to the
illustration. The illustration needs to be *right there* or the text doesn't
make sense. I didn't think about that when each chapter was an infinitely
scrolling web page, and by the time I realized, it was too late.

With the hundreds of illustrations and thousand-plus code snippets, I had given
myself thirty giant interrelated bin-packing exercises. The hard part of
typesetting was figuring out how to adjust things to minimize that dead space.
Sometimes I'd split a code snippet in two. Maybe add a little extra padding
around one image to spread stuff across the page a little. Or crowd another one
so that it *just* fits on the page. Sometimes I'd tweak an illustration to make
it shorter to fit on a page or taller to eat up some whitespace.

This was the real challenge of typesetting the book and why it took me two
months to get through all the chapters.

## Front matter and back matter

Did you know that there are professional indexers? People whose job it is to
write indexes for books? They even [write books][index] about how to write
indexes. (One would presume that these books have truly superb indexes.)

[index]: https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/I/bo3625262.html

I did not hire one of those eminently skilled professionals. Instead, I spent
two weeks going through every damn chapter *again* doing my best to pretend that
I know what I'm doing. InDesign's support for indexes is actually pretty nice.
You can basically just select some text and say, "Make an index entry for this."
Then it collects all of those and generates an index for the whole book. But
actually *adding* all of those entries is a mind-numbing chore.

The index is the main piece of *back matter* -- the stuff at the end of a book
after its main content. There is also *front matter*. You'll never guess where
that goes. I put together a title page, copyright page, dedication, and
acknowledgements. Then I let InDesign generate a table of contents for me.

This was a magical moment. At this point, I had a complete book:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/inside.jpg">
  <figcaption>Here's what the inside looks like.</figcaption>
</figure>

Or, at least, I had the *inside* of one.

## Cover design

A lot of authors obsess over their cover and envision it the whole time they are
writing. Despite what the aphorism says, people *do* judge books by their cover
and a good one makes a big difference. At least, that's the case over in fiction
land. In computer science, judging by the other books I have laying around, the
artistic merit of the cover appears to be somewhat less critical. I guess when
the prof says you have to buy the book to pass the class, a clip art cover is
sufficiently compelling.

Since I am *not* a professor who can garner sales by fiat, I spent a lot of time
on the cover design. I take photos, so I thought it could look nice to put
something detailed on the cover to liven it up. I went through my thousands of
photos trying to find something that fit. And, while I have some pretty
pictures, none of them felt like they worked as covers. They felt arbitrary.

Eventually I realized that the visual language of the book is those pen and ink
illustrations. So I drew a bigger more detailed version of [the mountain
illustration I use as a metaphor for the compilation process][mountain]. I also
hand-lettered a new title:

[mountain]: http://craftinginterpreters.com/a-map-of-the-territory.html#the-parts-of-a-language

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/cover-trace.jpg">
</figure>

It's a real typeface (Acumin Pro Extra Condensed) but I hand-traced a printout
to give it some imperfect charm. I picked a color palette to try to give it a
sort of a mimeographed 1950s scouting manual vibe.

## Proofreading the proof

Now I really had a book. I uploaded the PDF exports to KDP and ordered a proof
copy. A week later, a surprisingly heavy box arrived. This was the first moment
I really understood just how *big* this book I wrote is. Up until this point, it
was just data files. But seeing it fill up an Amazon box clarified the scale of
the project in a way that the time I spent never quite did.

So I had a book, but it *still* wasn't done. Because the typesetting process
involved a lot of manual labor. To err is human, so now I had to *proofread* --
to literally go through the proof and read it looking for mistakes. I marked
them all with sticky notes:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/edits.jpg">
  <figcaption>I put an "x" on each sticky note to mark when I had applied the
  fix to the InDesign files.</figcaption>
</figure>

Here's where it got stressful. If you're a programmer, then source control and
diff is deeply ingrained in your workflow. Whenever I make a change, I take for
granted that I can then see a diff in the commit to verify that I changed only
what I intended *and nothing else*.

I did put the InDesign files in a Git repo, but they are giant opaque binary
files. Also, InDesign has a habit of changing them even when it doesn't seem
like I've actually made any real changes. There's nothing quite like syncing all
the styles across the chapters, seeing every single file marked changed and
wondering, "Did I just accidentally move every bullet list item 3 points to the
left?" It felt like flying blind at exactly the stage in the process where I
really wanted to see *exactly* what was happening.

Did I engineer my way out of this problem? You're [damn right I did][tile]. I
wrote a Dart script that would take a PDF of the book, extract every page, and
then generate a single huge PNG file with every page tiled across it. It looks
like this:

[tile]: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/blob/master/tool/bin/tile_pages.dart

<figure class="wide">
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/pages.png">
</figure>

If you zoom in, each page is about this big:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/pages-zoom.png">
  <figcaption>If you're on a retina display, this is a 100% zoom.</figcaption>
</figure>

Every time I changed the InDesign files and committed them, I exported a PDF
for that commit and generated a tile image. Then I wrote a little Photoshop
action that would take two of those and draw a big red border around any pixels
that differed. Here is what all of the proofreading changes look like:

<figure class="wide">
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/diff.png">
</figure>

And zoomed in:

<figure>
  <img class="framed" src="/image/2021/07/diff-zoom.png">
</figure>

There isn't enough detail in the tile image to tell exactly what changed, but
the red tells me which pages need a visual inspection. I know I should be proud
of, like, writing an entire textbook on programming languages. But, honestly, I
think I'm most proud of this dumb little script. It was *such* a relief to be
able to programmatically verify that, yes, this PDF looks exactly like the last
one except for the one expected change.

## Ebooks are also books

Once I incorporated all the proofreading fixes, the print edition was really for
real totally done. But people also like reading ebooks and Kindle, so I needed
to make those too.

Again, writing my own build system helped. I tweaked it to be able to export the
antiquated XHTML that EPUB requires as well as all the weird metadata and
manifest stuff that goes into one. A few command-line invocations later and I
had Kindle and EPUB e-books. I tested in a bunch of readers and tweaked the CCS
to try to find a compromise between all of their renderers.

## Updating the site and launching

At this point -- and now we're talking this past weekend as I write this
sentence -- I had a folder with all of the final files for every edition of the
book. All that remained was to update the front page of the book's website to
point to where people can get them. I took some photos and put on my web
designer hat for a while. I tried to make it tolerably responsive.

Then I wrote this blog post. It's weird to put that in the past tense since I
just wrote it. But I guess it's in the past now.

Tomorrow, I'm going to upload the files to the various sites and stores. I'll
update the site to have links to all of those as they go live. Once the stores
have processed the uploads and everything is available, I'll publish this post
and update the site. I'll write a note for the mailing list and feel nervous
emailing that many people. If you're reading this, I already did all that and
the book is really, really done.

## What next?

Ever since I finished the last chapter, people have been asking me what I'm
going to do next. I have people I consider close friends now who have never
known me when I *wasn't* writing this book.

Many ask what I'm going to write next, or suggest a topic. I interpret this as a
compliment -- they like my writing and want more. But it also feels like asking
a mom in labor whether she plans to have more kids. I've had my legs in the
stirrups for six years, so I'm gonna just relax a bit after all the pushing is
over before I even *think* about another book baby.

What I really plan to do is... not *plan* to do anything. This writing project
has been an enormous exercise in self-applied delayed gratification. On top of
that, the pandemic brought its own basket of deferred dreams. I've gotten so
skilled at denying myself and postponing, so good at tuning out what I *feel*
like doing, that it's hard to even hear those feelings any more. I don't
remember what my own joy sounds like.

So I'm gonna check out for a while and go hunting for my pleasure centers. Maybe
[make some more music][tiny]. Maybe go fishing. Probably spend more time with
friends and family (safely). I might get back to working on [my
roguelike][hauberk]. Or maybe I won't do any of those. Maybe I'll just go out in
the backyard and bask mindlessly in the sun like a lizard. The important part is
I won't decide until I feel like it.

[tiny]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCSMJ0iRwAhIFYSpntOEtn2g
[hauberk]: https://github.com/munificent/hauberk

I'm sure eventually I'll get the itch to work on something more sizeable again.
(But, God-willing, I will never spend six years on a single project again in my
life.) Until then, I hope you enjoy the book. Despite all the work, I had a lot
of fun making it, and it was *always* a joy to hear from readers who liked it.
It's the only thing that kept me going this long and enabled me to get it done.
