tags = c# code design
---

# ["Constrained Compound" Design Pattern](http://journal.stuffwithstuff.com/2008/11/23/constrained-compound-design-pattern/ "&#8220;Constrained Compound&#8221; Design Pattern")

I've seen a lot of people argue that inheritance is an anti-feature in a
language and that it's never necessary. That rubbed me the wrong way because I
use it pretty frequently in a recurring pattern, and I think it works well. I
figured the least I could do was try to document it and add to the design
pattern language. After thinking about it a bit more, I realized actually I
_don't_ need inheritance to do it anyway. So, here's a little design pattern
for you, solved with and without inheritance:

> _Problem:_

Often you need to define a number of behaviors in terms of (and only in terms
of) a small set of atomic operations that can be freely combined.

Consider a UI framework that draws widgets. Each widget needs to be drawn its
own way, but all of them are drawn using a few primitive drawing operations:
text, lines, and shapes. Since this drawing will happen frequently and at
unpredictable times, you want to encourage the widget implementers to only use
those basic operations and not call into all sorts of places in the codebase.

As the API developer, there's basically two things you want to provide to your
clients: the set of operations, and the sandbox to combine them in. If you
make both of those apparent enough, then [they'll stick to those
operations](http://blogs.msdn.com/brada/archive/2003/10/02/50420.aspx).


> _Solution:_

Allow the user to define a function whose body has access to an object (either
`this` or an explicit parameter) that contains only the operations they should
use to implement the function.

There's two ways I've found myself providing this kind of system, one of which
uses inheritance, one of which does not.

## Atomic Operations as Protected Methods

The most frequent way I use the pattern is by defining a base class with a
number of protected methods and a single abstract one. The protected methods
are the atomic operations, and the abstract one is the sandbox where they're
used. By making them protected (but not virtual), the implication is clear to
derivers: "these methods are here for your use." The abstract sandbox methods
says, "Here's where you do your work." If you've minimized global and static
objects then the limited parameters to the sandbox say, "You only really have
access to the methods in `this`" so just use those. Here's an example:


    public abstract class Widget
    {
        // the sandbox
        public abstract void Draw();

        protected void DrawString(string text, int x, int y) { /* */ }
        protected void DrawLine(int x1, int y1, int x2, int y2) { /* */ }
        protected void DrawRect(int x, int y, int w, int h) { /* */ }
    }

    public class MyWidget : Widget
    {
        public override void Draw()
        {
            DrawString("MyWidget", 5, 3);
            DrawRect(0, 0, 200, 20);

            for (int x = 0; x < 200; x += 5)
            {
                DrawLine(x, 15, x, 20);
            }
        }
    }

If you try to go down this path, one limitation you will quickly realize is
that often the base class itself doesn't have enough contextual information to
provide those atomic functions. That needs to be pased in, but you don't want
the sandbox to have it (since it could then poke at it directly). Here's a
typical way around it:


    public abstract class Widget
    {
        // the public API
        public void Draw(DrawContext context)
        {
            // store what we need to implement the atomic operations
            mContext = context;

            // but don't give it to the sandbox
            DrawInternal();

            // done with it
            mContext = null;
        }

        // the sandbox
        protected abstract void DrawInternal();

        protected void DrawString(string text, int x, int y) { /* */ }
        protected void DrawLine(int x1, int y1, int x2, int y2) { /* */ }
        protected void DrawRect(int x, int y, int w, int h) { /* */ }

        private DrawContext mContext;
    }

Now `DrawString()`, etc. have access to the DrawContext, but the derived
widget itself does not.

## Atomic Operations as Object Parameter

If you're not a fan of OOP or inheritance, here's another way to do the
pattern. If you notice above, what we're basically doing is providing all of
the atomic operations as methods available on `this`, which is then an
implicit argument to the sandbox method `Draw()`. Instead of using `this` you
can always make those operations an explicit parameter. Here's a way to use
that to have different widgets draw differently without using inheritance:


    public class Widget
    {
        public Widget(Action<DrawOperations> drawFunc)
        {
            mDrawFunc = drawFunc;
        }

        public void Draw(DrawContext context)
        {
            mDrawFunc(new DrawOperations(context));
        }

        private class DrawOperations
        {
            public DrawOperations(DrawContext context)
            {
                mContext = context;
            }

            public void DrawString(string text, int x, int y) { /* */ }
            public void DrawLine(int x1, int y1, int x2, int y2) { /* */ }
            public void DrawRect(int x, int y, int w, int h) { /* */ }

            private DrawContext mContext;

        }

        private Action<DrawOperations> mDrawFunc;
    }

    public Widget MakeMyWidget()
    {
        Widget widget = new Widget(
            operations =>
            {
                operations.DrawString("MyWidget", 5, 3);
                operations.DrawRect(0, 0, 200, 20);

                for (int x = 0; x < 200; x += 5)
                {
                    operations.DrawLine(x, 15, x, 20);
                }
            });
        }

        return widget;
    }

This has the advantage of letting you later change how a widget draws without
baking it into the class hierarchy, but may be a bit odd to people with only
class-based OOP language experience.

## A Note on Patterns

There's a lot of hype that surrounds the idea of [design patterns][47]. When
[the book](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_Patterns) first came out, C++ people who were struggling to understand
OOP swarmed to it like it contained revelation from on high. After a while,
people (especially non-OOP people) rejected that outright and claimed Design
Patterns was simply a collection of boilerplate to get around the limitations
of crappy OOP languages. Neither of those were ever the intent of
[Alexander's](http://many.corante.com/archives/2004/04/26/a_city_is_not_a_tree.php) [Pattern Language](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Pattern_Language) concept. Patterns are supposed to be
a simple clarification of things people are already doing, and the language of
patterns is intended to always be evolving and growing. It's neither
revelation nor prescription (do this, don't do that). It's simply "here's this
problem we see often and here's a good way we see people solve it."

   [47]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_pattern_(computer_science)

Patterns are _not_ supposed to be a brand-new high-tech innovation (an
excellent pattern in A Pattern Language encourages you to put a bench by your
front door). If you read the Constrained Compound pattern above and thought,
"Oh yeah, I've done something similar a bunch of times," then _good_. It's
familiarity means it's a good solution because a lot of people have used it
and is worth adding to the language. Now it has a name.
